+++
abstract = "We report 21-year timing of one of the most precise pulsars: PSR J1713+0747. Its pulse times of arrival are well modeled by a comprehensive pulsar binary model including its three-dimensional orbit and a noise model that incorporates short- and long-timescale correlated noise such as jitter and red noise. Its timing residuals have weighted root mean square 92 ns. The new data set allows us to update and improve previous measurements of the system properties, including the masses of the neutron star ($1.31\\pm 0.11 M\\_{\\odot}$) and the companion white dwarf ($0.286\\pm 0.012 M\\_{\\odot}$) as well as their parallax distance $1.15\\pm 0.03$ kpc. We measured the intrinsic change in orbital period, ${\\dot{P}}^{Int}\\_{b}$, is $-0.20\\pm 0.17$ ps s$^{-1}$, which is not distinguishable from zero. This result, combined with the measured ${\\dot{P}}^{Int}\\_{b}$ of other pulsars, can place a generic limit on potential changes in the gravitational constant $G$. We found that $\\dot{G}/G$ is consistent with zero [$(-0.6\\pm 1.1)  \\times 10^{-12}$ yr$^{-1}$, 95% confidence] and changes at least a factor of 31 (99.7% confidence) more slowly than the average expansion rate of the universe. This is the best $\\dot{G}/G$ limit from pulsar binary systems. The  ${\\dot{P}}^{Int}\\_{b}$ of pulsar binaries can also place limits on the putative coupling constant for dipole gravitational radiation $\\kappa_D = (-0.9\\pm 3.3)\\times 10^{-4}$ (95% confidence). Finally, the nearly circular orbit of this pulsar binary allows us to constrain statistically the strong-field post-Newtonian parameters $\\Delta$, which describes the violation of strong equivalence principle, and $\\hat{a}\\_3$, which describes a breaking of both Lorentz invariance in gravitation and conservation of momentum. We found, at 95% confidence, $\\Delta \\lt 0.01$ and $\\hat{a}\\_3 \\lt 2\\times 10^{-20}$ based on PSR J1713+0747."
authors = ['Zhu, W. W.', 'Stairs, I. H.', 'Demorest, P. B.', 'Nice, D. J.', '**Ellis, J. A.**', 'Ransom, S. M.', 'Arzoumanian, Z.', 'Crowter, K.', 'Dolch, T.', 'Ferdman, R. D.', 'Fonseca, E.', 'Gonzalez, M. E.', 'Jones, G.', 'Jones, M. L.', 'Lam, M. T.', 'Levin, L.', 'McLaughlin, M. A.', 'Pennucci, T.', 'Stovall, K.', 'Swiggum, J.']
publication_types = ["2"]
date = "2015-08-01"
publication = "*The Astrophysical Journal*"
title = "Testing Theories of Gravitation Using 21-Year Timing of Pulsar Binary J1713+0747"
url_pdf = "https://arxiv.org/pdf/1504.00662.pdf"
abstract_short = ""
image_preview = ""
math = true
publication_short = ""
selected = false
url_code = ""
url_dataset = ""
url_project = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""

[[url_custom]]
name = "ADS"
url = "http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015ApJ...809...41Z"

+++
